Hello everyone, I’m Andy Zhuang. My research project is ….

SLIDE #1
Most cells in our bodies contain essentially the same DNA. What makes an immune cell, a brain cell, or a cancer cell behave differently is which genes are active.
DNA is packaged around a structure called chromatin. When chromatin is open, cellular machinery can reach the DNA, making nearby genes more likely to be expressed. When chromatin is closed, the DNA is less accessible and those genes are less likely to be active.
Changes in chromatin accessibility can alter how cells behave. In diseases such as cancer, abnormal regions may open or close, activating harmful genes or shutting down protective ones.

SLIDE #2
To measure chromatin accessibility, researchers commonly use a method called ATAC-seq. It uses an enzyme called Tn5 transposase, which only cuts the DNA at open regions. 
we then create a cut profile. The x-axis represents regions along the genome, and the y-axis shows how many cuts are in each region. Regions with many high counts are more likely to contain open chromatin.
For most cell types, we already know their approximate cut profile.

SLIDE #3
If we tie ATAC cut profiles to location information, this allows us to see exactly where different types of cells are developing and how a cell’s surorundings can affect its behavior. This is called spatial-ATAC, a relatively new technology developed in 2022. 
It is a powerful technology that can be widely used to map disease regions, study how nearby cells many influence a cell's behavior. This helps study things like cancer development, Alzheimer’s disease, and many other important medical questions of today.

SLIDE #4
However, for spatial ATAC, one of the challenges is that each spatial spot or location is much larger than a typical cell. so each spot may contain many cell and cell types.
Because of this, the cut profile we get is a mixture of all cells in each spot. Deconvolution is the solution to estimate the proportion of each type of cell within a spot. This is like identifying ingredients in a smoothie.
Unfortunately, current methods are borrowed from Spatial RNA deconvolution, which is quite different from spatial ATAC. 

SLIDE #5
As you can see on this slide, Spatial-RNA counts how many times each gene is expression. On the gene expression profile, the x-axis are genes not cuts, adapting gene expression profile to cut profile does not work well.

SLDIE #6
In this research, myy approach is to include additional information, namely cut length, which is the distance between two nearby cut points. This information is not available for spatial RNA because RNA sequencing counts gene expression not cuts.
I will then use a Bayesian model to statistically estimate the composition of different types of cells in a spot. My hypothesis is that a Bayesian model using the additional ATAC cut-length signals will be more accurate than a model that uses the cut counts alone.

SLIDE #7
In order to test the model, I will use public datasets such as PBMC human peripheral blood cells, human tissue with tumor, bone marrow, and immune cells, and mouse tissues. In each of these datasets the percentage of each type of cell is already known. I will compare my model with and cut length information. The current status is that I have implemented the Bayesian model with the cut length information, and tried it on the PBMC datasets and the results look promising.
