#Slide 1: Open close DNA region and impact on gene expression
Introduce open region and closed region (open/closed chromatin) on DNA sequence, how is that related to gene expression, different cell type behave differently, including cancer cells, which express differently, this is also related to many diseases.


#Slide 2: ATAC sequencing, and cut profile
Then talk about ATAC sequencing, a widely used technology for identifying open/closed regions.
Tn5 enzyme can only cut at open regions. We build a cut (or peak) profile that count the number of cuts made to each region to identify open/closed regions. X-axis is region, y-axis is the number of cuts by the enzyme in the corresponding region.

Then talk about that for each cell type, the approximate cut profile is typically known and given ahead-of-time.

#Slide 3: Spatial ATAC
Ție ATAC cut profile with location information, allow scientists to see exactly where diseases like cancer are developing and how a cell's physical neighborhood changes its behavior.
It is a recent technology started in 2022 and is getting very popular. 

#Slide 4: The deconvolution problem for spatial ATAC
Location are identified as spots in a grid, but each spot is much larger than one cell, so we get a the cut profile which is a mixture of the cut profiles of all cells in that spot.
The deconvolution problem is to unmix it and get the number of cells for each cell type in the spot.
Deconvolution works like identifying ingredients in a smoothie

Novelty of problem: Most recent technology is from 2025, which uses existing deconvolution for spatial RNA-sequencing. 

#Slide 5: my approach and hypothesis
My approach is include addditional information, it is called cut length, the distance between two nearby cut points, which is not available for spatial RNA seq.

I then use a Bayesian model to statically estimate the composition of number of cell of different cell types at a spot.

Hypothesis: A Bayesian model using with the additional ATAC cut-length signals will be more accurate than using the cut counts alone.


#Slide 6: Experiments and project status

Public datasets such as PBMC human peripheral blood cells
Human tissue with tumor, bone marrow, immune cells.
And mouse tissues.

The current status is that I have implemented the Bayesian model with the cut length information, and tried on the PBMC datasets and the results look promising.


Hello everyone, I’m Andy Zhuang. My research project is ….


Most cells contain the same DNA, but different types of cells express different regions of it. This is why different types of cells, including cancer cells, can behave so differently. This is also important to the study of many diseases, where researchers try to determine the differences in DNA expression within the disease cells.

ATAC-seq is a widely used technology used to identify open and closed regions. This method uses transposon enzymes to cut at special regions, building a profile of cuts (or peaks) that counts the number of cuts made to each region to identify open and closed regions. These profiles are often represented as bar graphs, where the x-axis is the region and the y-axis is the number of cuts made by the enzyme in that region.
For most cell types, the approximate cut profile is usually already known and given ahead of time.

If we tie ATAC cut profiles to location information, this allows us to see exactly where different types of cells are developing and how a cell’s surorundings can affect its behavior. Spatial ATAC-seq is a method for measuring these cut profiles across multiple cells. It is a recent technology developed in 2022, and in the past few years, it has already been put to use in studying brain development, cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, and other important medical questions of today.

In spatial ATAC, locations are identified in a grid of spots. However, each spot is larger than a normal cell, so they may contain multiple types of cells. Because of this, we get a cut profile that mixes the cut profiles of all cells in that spot. This mixes together potentially important signals about DNA expression. To solve this problem, researchers use deconvolution to estimate the proportion of each type of cell within a spot. Current methods rely on RNA analysis. The most recent technology is from 2025 and uses existing deconvolution methods from spatial RNA sequencing. These methods use fragment counts but not fragment lengths in their estimates.

My approach is to include additional information, namely cut length, the distance between two nearby cut points, which is not available for spatial RNA methods and is reserved for ATAC signals. I will then use a Bayesian model to statistically estimate the composition of different types of cells in a spot. My hypothesis is that a Bayesian model using the additional ATAC cut-length signals will be more accurate than a model that uses the cut counts alone.

In order to test the model, I will use public datasets such as PBMC human peripheral blood cells, human tissue with tumor, bone marrow, and immune cells, and mouse tissues. In each of these datasets the percentage of each type of cell is already known. I will compare my model with and without fragment length information. The current status is that I have implemented the Bayesian model with the cut length information, and tried on the PBMC datasets and the results look promising.
